# Modeling and Novelty Detection in EEG signals
## For detecting epilepsy abnormalities

Epilepsy affects approximately 1% of the world's population and the majority of them lives in the low and middle-income countries (LMICs). Epilepsy is usually diagnosed by a human interpreter that reads through an EEG recording. The main barrier for people being diagnosed and treated for epilepsy, in LMICs, is the limited accessibility of EEG and the lack of interpreters. McKenzie et al. (2017) describes a study were data from portable EEG scanners is sent abroad for analysis by voluntaries.
This thesis examines how to shorten the time spent manually interpreting the EEG recordings, by using novelty detection. A preprocessing pipeline is suggested and two methods for novelty detection are examined.  

The thesis uses two real EEG data sets to validate the process. The first data set is from the Children's Hospital in Boston and includes records with labeled seizures. The other one is recorded in Guinea with a portable EEG scanner(SBS2) and contains no labels.  The methods are first analyzed and developed with the labeled data. These methods are then tested on the data from the SBS2. In the preprocessing steps artifacts are removed by classifying Independent Components. Features are extracted and a Principal Component Analysis is used for dimension reduction. An interesting observation was made when the Median absolute deviation (MAD) of the signal was inspected between subjects. The MAD values were in general higher for subjects showing epileptic discharge, indicating that it could be used as a global discriminant. Two methods based on Gaussian distribution were used for novelty detection which showed similar results. The first method was to fit a Gaussian distribution to the data and the latter was to use a robust Gaussian Mixture Model based on the work from Roberts and Tarassenko (1994). Abnormal data points were detected, however, there was no difference between subjects with and without epileptiform discharges. 

These first steps of running experiments on the data from the SBS2 show promising results. They offer an option to implement; a data quality control, a global discriminant using MAD and novelty detection to localize the abnormal data points. From a practical point of view, this thesis contributes an analysis on how to shorten the time spent on interpreting the data. This analysis could be used as preliminary work for future studies on the interpretation of SBS2 data from epilepsy patients in the LMICs.


* Main.m includes:
** GetData.m:  Extract data, adds channel location and transfer data from bipolar to unipolar if necessary
